You are probably already familiar with the terms and the concepts of mean and variance.
In this video, I'm going to show you the formulas.
We're going to discuss different measures of variability that will ultimately lead into things like
L1 and L2 regularization in deep learning models.
And I'm also going to show you how to implement these quantities in Python.
And an important parameter for creating variance or defining the variance in Python.
In numpy.
Okay.
So let's start by talking about the mean.
The mean is the most commonly used measure of central tendency.
And the idea of central tendency is to get one number one value.
That tells us something about the concentration of the data in a distribution.
So imagine these three lines here correspond to different distributions.
These are histograms of data values that we've measured.
Maybe these are distributions of height of different people in three different countries.
Or maybe these are housing prices in different parts of the country or different cities.
So what we want, as our measure of mean, is a value that tells us something about the center of each
of these distributions.
So that is the mean.
It's also called the arithmetic mean or the average.
The formula is fairly straightforward.
We just take all of our data values x.
So x would correspond to the sample of data that we have.
We sum up all of the data values.
And then we divide by the number of data values.
And the mean is commonly indicated using a bar on top of the variable for the data.
So x bar would indicate the mean or the average of x.
Sometimes you also see the average indicated as the Greek letter mu or mu with a subscript of the variable
name so mu x.
So the mean is suitable for roughly normally distributed data.
So data that follow a a more or less a Gaussian distribution.
So here's a quick example.
Um you have a collection of numbers.
We can sum these up pretty quickly.
These two is eight.
This is two.
And so eight plus two is ten.
And then we have 12345 numbers in our collection.
So ten divided by five gives us an average of two.
Pretty straightforward okay.
Here I want to show you that the mean is not necessarily always so indicative of central tendency for
non-normally distributed data.
So this dark blue case here, this is actually not the failure scenario.
This is like the reference scenario where the mean is what we expect it to be.
Here we have an interesting bimodal distribution.
And the mean is actually the same as the mean of this Gaussian distribution.
But the mean here of this, this cyan distribution, the mean doesn't actually characterize the central
tendency of the distribution.
Most of the data are clustered down here and up here, and the mean doesn't actually reflect that.
So this is kind of a failure scenario.
Here's another failure scenario by the way.
That failure is an apology quotes here because the formula itself isn't failing.
But the interpretation of the result of the formula is a little awkward given the context of the distribution.
So here we have a strong right tailed distribution.
So a non-normal non-Gaussian distribution.
The mean is somewhere over here.
But you can see that most of the data are actually concentrated far to the left of the mean.
This is a typical distribution for for example, if you look at income or wealth, you see that in a
country most people have, you know, small to moderate amounts of wealth and a very, you know, relatively
small number of people have a huge amount of wealth.
And that pulls up the mean in this case, you know, you could use something like the median.
But a deeper discussion of different measures of central tendency is outside the scope here.
Because in deep learning, we mostly just use the the mean to characterize the center of a distribution.
Okay.
So that's about the mean or the average.
Now I want to talk a little bit more about the distribution or variance.
So here we see two distributions that have exactly the same mean right.
The center of these two distributions is the same.
But obviously these are not identical distributions.
They differ by the width of the distributions.
And this is our measure of dispersion.
The most commonly used measure of dispersion is variance which is basically the same thing as standard
deviation.
I'll talk about how variance and standard deviation are related to each other in a moment.
So here is the formula for variance.
You can see at first it looks a little bit similar to the formula for the mean where we're summing individual
values and dividing by n.
It's a little bit different from the formula for mean because we are subtracting the mean from each
individual data value.
So here is the individual data values.
And we subtract the mean over all of the data values.
And then we take that individual value and we square it.
And then we sum all of these squared differences or distances to the mean.
And then instead of dividing by n minus one sorry.
Instead of dividing by n we divide by n minus one.
I'm going to talk more about this formula in a moment.
On the next slide I just want to give you a few examples.
The variance is suitable for basically any distribution.
Here's an example.
We have a collection of numbers here.
And so to compute the variance of this set of numbers, we need to first compute the mean or the average
of this set, so we can do that quickly in our head.
So this is eight plus zero plus four is 12 plus one is 13.
Minus two is 11 plus seven is 18.
And then we have six numbers.
So that gives us an average value of three.
So here I've written out actually this whole formula.
So this is all of these numbers minus three.
So minus the mean.
You can see that part here.
And then we square all of these differences between each individual data point and the mean.
And then we sum.
So that's this part here.
And then here we divide by n minus one which in this case is five.
And that gives us a variance of 16.
Here's another example where I have different numbers.
You can see these are closer together to each other.
And here the variance is considerably smaller.
It's two thirds.
Now we can graph all of those numbers on the number line.
So this was the first distribution.
This was the second one.
So you see these numbers here.
This set of numbers has a larger variance than this set of numbers.
And when we look at the graph we can see that the numbers are more distributed.
There's a larger wider distribution of the numbers here compared to here where all the numbers are are
really close to each other geometrically.
Okay.
So a few questions about this formula.
Why do we mean center.
Why don't we just square all of the individual values.
Well it's a couple reasons.
One is that we want the variance to indicate the dispersion around the average.
And the reason for that is that we want these two data sets to have exactly the same variance.
Because these are actually the same amount of variability in these two data sets.
All I did was just add 100 to each element here.
So we want these two data sets to have the same variance because they have the same overall dispersion.
Why are the differences squared.
There's also several answers to that.
Several mathematical answers.
Squaring values has some nice properties.
It's also useful for for taking derivatives and calculus.
It's useful geometrically.
It has some nice geometric properties.
But also part of the reason is that we want the distances to the average.
And without squaring, the variance would basically always be zero.
So here I have a little example.
The same couple numbers from the previous slide.
If we would apply this formula without squaring.
So we just subtract the mean and sum up all the residual values.
After subtracting the mean it trivially always goes to zero.
So therefore we square to get rid of the negative numbers.
Now you might be thinking hey Mike, why do we need to square if we need the distances and we want to
get rid of the negative numbers because we want the magnitude of the difference is why don't we just
take the absolute value instead of taking the mean?
Well, that's also possible.
That formula looks like this.
It's almost exactly the same, but we take the absolute value instead of squaring.
And this formula is called the mean absolute difference or mad.
So a couple of key differences between variance and mean absolute difference.
Squaring with variance emphasizes larger values.
It has some nice properties for optimization.
As I mentioned in calculus, it's continuous and differentiable in all cases.
There's a bunch of other nice properties that I won't get into here.
Um, the the variance is closer to r is the Euclidean distance.
If the second moment of the distribution and is a tight link to least squares regression, there's some
nice math that works out.
But yeah, the mean absolute difference is also uh, Distance is also good.
It's more robust to outliers.
In statistics it's not as commonly used as the variance.
But you will see this difference between these two formulas here.
In this course we're going to be talking about L2 and L1 regularization.
Turns out that L1 regularization is kind of equivalent to the mean absolute difference.
And L2 regularization is kind of equivalent to variance.
So more on that later in the course.
I want to very briefly talk about standard deviation.
This is a term you've probably heard before.
The standard deviation is simply the square root, the principal square root of the positive square
root of the variance.
So variance is typically indicated as sigma squared.
And that means that standard deviation is indicated as sigma.
This formula is exactly the same as for variance.
But we just put a standard deviation sign here.
Sorry, I meant a square root sign here that gives us the standard deviation.
And here, just as a just a real quick reminder that taking the square root of some number is equivalent
to multiplying or taking that number to the power of one half.
Here we are in Python.
I'm going to show you quickly how to compute the mean and the variance in numpy.
So here's a list of numbers I get the length of the list.
So the number of numbers that we have.
And then I compute the sum divided by n and numpy dot mean.
So these should both be exactly the same quantities.
Turns out that they're both pretty close to pi okay here I'm computing variance.
So here I apply the numpy formula for variance.
So np dot var.
Here I'm implementing the formula exactly how I showed in the slides.
So x Minus the mean of x square.
All of those individual values sum all over all of these squared distances and then divide by n minus
one.
Then we print these out.
Obviously these should both be the same.
But they are not exactly the same.
They're pretty close, but they are not exactly the same.
So it turns out uh oh.
You know, it turns out that there is an optional second input in the var function that specifies the
degrees of freedom, which is essentially this number here that we are subtracting off.
Now a deeper discussion of the difference between computing variance using n minus one or scaling by
n minus one versus scaling by n is beyond the scope of this course.
That's the sort of thing you would learn about more in a statistics course.
For now, suffice it to say that this is called a biased variance.
So if you just divide by n it's it's a biased measure of variance.
And if you subtract one here you divide by n minus one.
This is unbiased.
So this removes a bias.
This is also related to degrees of freedom.
Essentially the the short version of the story is that because we already know the mean, we know that
the average of all of these values here, I should say these values, we know the average of all of
these values is zero.
So that removes one degree of freedom from our our statistic.
So we have to account for removing one degree of freedom.
Otherwise we impose a bias.
So I'm not sure why the default in Python is to have the denominator degrees of freedom to be zero,
in my opinion, and the opinion of many other, um, statistics oriented people, that's, you know,
it's a little unfortunate that that's the default, but it is what it is.
So now we can compute the correct unbiased variance.
And we see that that matches our formula from the slides here.
Okay.
Now I just want to show that it doesn't really matter so much whether you use the biased or unbiased
variance.
The difference of dividing by n minus one for relatively small data sets like this.
This is, you know, only a handful of data values here.
It does make a pretty significant difference.
But as the data set gets larger and larger, like n equals 1000, then we see that the difference gets
to be smaller and smaller.
So here we have a difference of only 0.1.
And you know when we work in deep learning we work with pretty large data sets.
So here is an N.
So we are working with a data set of 10,000 which is actually not even that big for deep learning.
And you can see, you know you have to get out pretty far to see any difference between these two methods.
So the conclusion here is that, yeah, you should be using when you're computing variance or standard
deviation, you should be using the unbiased measure.
But if you don't if you forget, you know, if you leave this parameter out, it really doesn't matter
unless you're working with very small data sets.
So in this video you learned about the mean also called the average.
And we spent quite a bit of discussion about these measures of dispersion variance standard deviation
and mean absolute difference.
Again these are issues that are relevant for deep learning.
In the context of normalization we have to normalize the data.
We have to normalize the weights of the model.
These are the quantities that we use for normalization.
And you'll also see the difference between squaring versus taking the absolute value of the variance
when we get to regularization.